---
currentMenu: phlip
---
## Phlip, the scripting language

Phlip syntax is based on [S-expressions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S-expression). They are represented by

- an atom, or
- an expression of the form `(x . y)` where `x` and `y` are S-expressions.

### Atoms

Atoms are forms that are indivisible elements of data or code. Atoms can be:
- **numbers** (like `42` and  `3.1416926539`)
- **strings** (like `"Hello world"`)
- **identifiers** or words (like `+`, `sqrt` and `define`)
- **keywords** that evaluates to themselves (like `#foo` and `#bar`)

### Lists

The second part of the definition is recursive and represents an ordered pair. Phlip also supports the abbreviated
notation to represent lists in S-expressions, so that `(x y z)` actually stands for `(x . (y . (z . ())))` where
`()` is the special _end-of-list_ object.

Parentheses `(` and `)` are used to delimit lists, which are primarily used to declare _function application_
forms.

```json
(print
    (join
        " "
        "Hello"
        "world"
    )
)
```

### Data structures

`[` and `]` are special delimiters to declare [vectors](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Array_data_structure),
one-dimensional arrays.

```json
[
    "lisp"
    "s-expression"
    "embeddable"
    "dialect"
]
```

`{` and `}` are special delimiters to declare [maps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Associative_array),
associative arrays containing a collection of key/value pairs such that each possible key appears at most once in the
collection. They have many applications including such fundamental
[programming patterns](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_design_pattern) as
[memoization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memoization) and solving the dictionary problem.

```json
{
    "name" "webgraphe/phlip"
    "description" "Embeddable scripts for PHP"
    "type" "library"
}
```

Because Phlip's syntax considers `,` and `:` as [whitespaces](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whitespace_character),
Phlip has near-complete support for the [JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)](http://json.org/).

Therefore, this JSON stream is totally compatible with the Phlip's syntax rules.
```json
{
    "name": "webgraphe/phlip",
    "description": "Embeddable scripts for PHP",
    "type": "library",
    "keywords": [
        "lisp",
        "s-expression",
        "embeddable",
        "dialect"
    ] 
}
```

Note that complete JSON support would require the definition of the `true`, `false` and `null` symbols, which can easily
be accomplished using the _Phlipy_ dialect.

### Programs

A program is a sequence of forms evaluated one after the other. When a program ends, it returns the result from the
last evaluated form.

This _Phlipy_ program would return `(int)64` as the last statement `(square (+ 3 5))` would evaluate to the square of
`8`.

```json
(define square (lambda (x) (* x x)))
(square (+ 3 5))
```
