---
currentMenu: phlipy
---
## Phlipy, the dialect

A dialect is a (relatively small) variation or extension of the language that does not change its intrinsic nature.
At its root, the Phlip syntax rules are enough to tokenize and parse lists, vectors and maps, but there isn't
a single function application possible without first injecting definitions in a context.

Phlipy does just that. A context can be bootstrapped from the `Webgraphe\Phlip\Phlipy::bootstrap()` method.

### Basic Language Definitions

As their name implies, they are the basic definitions from which the dialect can become homoiconic, _i.e._ data can be
used as code and code as data. This is proven by `Webgraphe\Phlip\Tests\Integration\LispTest` where only the basic
definitions are loaded in a context to build a whole programming language by executing
`tests/Integration/Scripts/Lisp.phlip`, a slightly adapted version of Paul Graham's
[code](http://lib.store.yahoo.net/lib/paulgraham/jmc.lisp) taken from
[The Roots of Lisp]((http://www.paulgraham.com/rootsoflisp.html)).

> ** DISCLAIMER **<br>
As the author of the Phlip scripting language, I did not intend to make _Phlipy_ part of the Lisp
family of languages. Phlip is aimed at PHP developers hoping to easily embed a scripting language in their applications.
Yes Phlip is based on s-expressions, yes it looks like a Lisp dialect, but **there is no point** fueling
[feuds](http://wiki.c2.com/?HolyWar) because of it.

#### `define`

This construct announces an intention to use a symbol as a global variable.

##### (**define** *symbol* *value*)

Evaluates *value* and set *symbol* to the result in the global context.

##### (**define** (*symbol* *parameters*...) *forms*...)

Sets *symbol* to a `lambda` created with optional *parameters* and *forms* (more about `lambda` below).

```json
(define (square x) (* x x))
```
is equivalent to:
```json
(define square (lambda (x) (* x x)))
```

#### `quote`

Returns its single argument, as written, without evaluating it.

##### (**quote** *object*)

Returns *object* without evaluating it.

An apostrophe character `'` followed by a form expands to a list whose first element is `quote`, and whose second
element is the object to quote. The read syntax `'x` is an abbreviation for `(quote x)`.

```json
(quote (+ 1 2)) => (+ 1 2)
(define foo 42)
foo => 42
(quote foo) => foo
'foo => foo
''foo => (quote foo)
['foo] => [foo]
{'foo 'bar} => {foo bar}
{'bar foo} => {bar 42}
```

A backtick character `` ` `` constructs allow you to quote a list, but selectively evaluate elements of that list. The
special marker `~` inside of the argument to _quasi-quote_ indicates a value that isn't constant. The evaluated result
is placed in the the list structure:

```json
`(a list of ~(+ 2 3) elements) => (a list of 5 elements)
```

#### `car`

Returns the value referred to by the first slot of a cons-cell, a data object that represents an ordered pair.

##### (**car** *list*)

Returns the value referred to by the first slot of *list*.

```json
(car '(+ 1 2)) => +
```

#### `cdr`

Returns the value referred to by the second slot of a cons-cell.

```json
(car '(+ 1 2)) => +
```

##### (**cdr** *list*)

Returns the value referred to by the second slot of *list*.

```json
(cdr '(+ 1 2)) => (1 2)
(cdr '(1 2)) => (2)
(cdr '(1 . 2)) => 2
(cdr '()) => ()
```

#### `cons`

Creates a new cons cell, a data object that represents an ordered pair.

##### (**cons** *object1* *object2*)

Creates and returns a new cons cell, making *object1* the car, and *object2* the cdr.

```json
(cons 1 '(2)) => (1 2)
(cons 1 '()) => (1)
(cons 1 2) => (1 . 2)
```

#### `atom?`

Tells if an object is an atom.

##### (**atom?** *object*)

A predicate that evaluates *object* and returns `true` if is the result is an atom. An atom can be a number, a string
of character, a keyword, the empty list (a.k.a. *nil* or PHP's `null`).

```json
(atom? 42) => true
(atom? '42) => true
(atom? ''42) => false
(atom? "Strings are atoms too") => true
(atom? #so-are-keywords) => true
(atom? ()) => true
(atom? (+ 2 3)) => true
(atom? '(+ 2 3)) => false
(atom? '()) => true
```

#### `equals?`

Tells if two objects strictly equal one another.

##### (**equals** *object1* *object2*)

A predicate that evaluates *object1* and *object2* and returns true if both objects strictly equal one another.

```json
(equals? 1 2) => false
(equals? () '()) => false
(equals? (+ 3 4) (+ 1 6)) => true
(equals? '(+ 3 4) '(+ 1 6)) => false
```

#### `cond`

Chooses among an arbitrary number of alternatives and returns the result from the evaluated forms of the first condition
that doesn't evaluate to *nil*.

##### (**cond** (*condition* *forms*...)...)

Chooses among an arbitrary number of alternatives. Each clause must be a list where the car of the list is the
condition; the remaining elements, if any, are the *forms* to execute. Returns the results of the evaluates *forms*
from the first non-*nil* condition.

```
(define x '(+ 1 2)) => (+ 1 2)
(cond
    ((atom? x) "x is an atom")
    (#true "x is not an atom")
) => "x is not an atom"
```

#### `lambda`

Declares an anonymous function written in _Phlipy_.

##### (**lambda** (*parameters*...) *forms*...)

Evaluates to an anonymous function (a literal PHP `\Closure`) where *parameters* are declared in a list of symbols
- this list is not subject to a function application, but instead declares the parameters of the function. When a Phlip
function is called, the argument values are matched up against the parameters of the lambda, which are given local
bindings with their respective values.

*forms* constitute the body of the function and are executed in their given order. The function returns the evaluation
result of the last form of the body.

```form
(lambda (x y) (+ (* x x) (* y y))) => \Closure
```

### Extra Language Definitions

_Phlipy_ ships with additional language features such as `let`, `list`, `if`, `while`, `macro`, type predicates,
arithmetic/comparison/logic/bitwise operators, math and string functions and many more.